father Daniel Berrigan once said that
writing about prisoners is a little like
writing about the dead I think what he
meant is that we treat prisoners as
ghosts
they're unseen and unheard it's easy to
simply ignore them and it's even easier
when the government goes to great
lengths to keep them hidden as a
journalist I think these stories of what
people in power do when no one is
watching
are precisely the stories that we need
to tell that's why I began investigating
the most secretive and experimental
prison units in the United States for
so-called second tier terrorists the
government calls these units
communications management units or CMU's
prisoners and guards call them little
Guantanamo
they are Islands into themselves but
unlike Gitmo they exist right here at
home floating within larger federal
prisons there are two CMU's one was
opened inside the prison in Terre Haute
Indiana and the other is inside this
prison in Marion Illinois
neither of them underwent the formal
review process that is required by law
when they were opened
CMU prisoners have all been convicted of
crimes some of their cases are
questionable and some involve threats
and violence I'm not here to argue the
guilt or innocence of any prisoner I'm
here because as Supreme Court Justice
Thurgood Marshall said when the prison
gates slam shut prisoners do not lose
their human quality every prisoner I've
interviewed has said there are three
flecks of light and the darkness of
prison phone calls letters and visits
from family CMU's aren't solitary
confinement but they radically restrict
all of these to levels that meet or
exceed the most extreme prisons in the
United States they're phone calls can be
limited to 45 minutes a month compared
to the 300 minutes other prisoners
receive
their letters can be limited to six
pieces of paper their visits can be
limited to four hours per month compared
to the 35 hours that people like Olympic
Park bomber Eric Rudolph receive in the
Supermax on top of that CMU visits are
non-contact which means prisoners are
not allowed to even hug their family as
one CMU prisoner said we're not being
tortured here except psychologically the
government won't say who is imprisoned
here but through court documents open
records requests and interviews with
current and former prisoners some small
windows into the CMU's have opened
there's an estimated 60 to 70 prisoners
here and they're overwhelmingly Muslim
they include people like dr. revealed to
fear
who violated the economic sanctions on
Iraq by sending medical supplies for the
children there they have included people
like Jesse and Arif Arif and his family
fled to New York from Saddam Hussein's
Iraq as refugees he was arrested in 2004
as part of an FBI sting Arif is an imam
and he was asked to bear witness to a
loan which is a tradition in Islamic
culture it turned out that one of the
people involved in the loan was trying
to enlist someone else in a fake attack
Arif didn't know for that he was
convicted of conspiracy to provide
material support to a terrorist group
the CMU's also includes some non Muslim
prisoners the guards call them balancers
meaning they help balance out the racial
numbers in hopes of deflecting the ball
suits these balancers include animal
rights and environmental activists like
Daniel McGowan McGowan was convicted of
participating in two arsons in the name
of defending the environment as part of
the Earth Liberation Front during his
sentencing he was afraid that he would
be sent to a rumored secret prison for
terrorists the judge dismissed all those
fears saying that they weren't supported
by any facts but that might be because
the government hasn't fully explained
why some prisoners end up in
CMU and who is responsible for these
decisions when McGowan was transferred
he was told it's because he is a
domestic terrorist a term the FBI uses
repeatedly when talking about
environmental activists now keep in mind
there are about 400 prisoners in US
prisons who are classified as terrorists
and only a handful of them are in the
CMU's in McGowan's case he was
previously at a low security prison and
he had no communications violations so
why was he moved like other CMU
prisoners McGowan repeatedly asked for
an answer a hearing or some opportunity
for an appeal this example from another
prisoner shows how those requests are
viewed once a transfer told him no at
one point the prison warden himself
recommended McGowan's transfer out of
the CMU citing his good behavior but the
warden was overruled by the Bureau of
Prisons counterterrorism unit working
with the Joint Terrorism Task Force of
the FBI later I found out that McGowan
was really sent to a CMU not because of
what he did but what he has said a memo
from the counterterrorism unit cited
McGowan's anti-government beliefs while
imprisoned he continued writing about
environmental issues saying that
activists must reflect on their mistakes
and listen to each other now in fairness
if you've spent any time at all in
Washington DC you know this is really a
radical concept for the government I
actually asked to visit McGowan in the
CMU and I was approved that gives quite
a shock first because as I've discussed
on this stage before I learned that the
FBI has been monitoring my work second
because it would make me the first and
only journalist to visit a CMU I had
even learned through the Bureau of
Prisons counterterrorism unit that they
had been monitoring my speeches about
CMU's like this one so how could I
possibly
be approved to visit a few days that
before I went out to the prison I got an
answer I was allowed to visit McGowan as
a friend not a journalist journalists
are not allowed here
McGowan was told by CMU officials that
if I asked any questions or published
any story that he would be punished for
my reporting when I arrived for our
visit the guards reminded me that they
knew who I was and knew about my work
and they said if I attempted to
interview McGowan the visit would be
terminated the Bureau of Prisons
describes CMU's as self-contained
housing units but I think that's an
Orwellian way of describing black holes
when you visit a CMU you go through all
the security checkpoints that you would
expect but then the walk to the
visitation room is silent when a CMU
prisoner has a visit the rest of the
prison is on lockdown I was ushered into
a small room so small my outstretched
arms could touch each wall there is a
grapefruit-sized orb in the ceiling for
the visit to be live monitored by the
counterterrorism unit in West Virginia
the unit insists that all the visits
have to be in English for CMU prisoners
which is an additional hardship for many
of the Muslim families there's a thick
sheet of foggy bulletproof glass and on
the other side was Daniel McGowan we
spoke through these handsets attached to
the wall and talked about books and
movies we did our best to find reasons
to laugh to fight boredom and amused
himself while in the CMU McGowan had
been spreading a rumor that I was
secretly the president of a Twilight fan
club in Washington DC for the record I'm
not but I kind of hoped the FBI now
thinks that Bella and Edward are
terrorists code names
during our visit McGowan spoke most and
at length about his niece Lily his wife
Jenny and how torturous it feels to
never be able to hug them to never be
able to hold their hands three months
after our visit McGowan was transferred
out of the CMU and then without warning
he was sent back again I had published
leaked CMU documents on my website and
the counterterrorism unit said that
McGowan had called his wife and asked
her to mail them he wanted to see what
the government was saying about him and
for that he was sent back to the CMU
when he was finally released at the end
of his sentence
his story got even more Kafka esque he
wrote an article for The Huffington Post
headline court documents prove I was
sent to a CMU for my political speech
the next day he was thrown back in jail
for his political speech
his attorneys quickly secured his
release but the message was very clear
don't talk about this place today nine
years after they were opened by the Bush
administration the government is
codifying how and why CMU's were created
according to the Bureau of Prisons they
are for prisoners with quote
inspirational significance I think that
is a very nice way of saying these are
political prisons for political
prisoners prisoners are sent to a CMU
because of their race their religion or
their political beliefs now if you think
that characterization is too strong just
look at some of the government's own
documents when some of McGowan's mail
was rejected by the CMU the sender was
told it's because the letters were
intended for political prisoners when
another prisoner animal rights activist
and east opinion was sent to a CMU it
was because of his anti-government and
anti corporate views now I know all of
this may be hard to believe that it's
happening right now and in the United
States but the unknown reality is that
the US has a dark history of
in Italy punishing people because of
their political beliefs in the 1960s
before Marian was home to the CMU it was
home to the notorious control unit
prisoners were locked down in solitary
for 22 hours a day the warden said the
unit was to quote control revolutionary
attitudes in the 1980's another
experiment called the Lexington high
security unit held women connected to
the Weather Underground Black Liberation
and Puerto Rican independence struggles
the prison radically restricted
communication and used sleep deprivation
in constant light for so-called
ideological conversion those prisons
were eventually shut down but only
through the campaigning of religious
groups and human rights advocates like
Amnesty International
today civil rights lawyers with the
Center for Constitutional Rights are
challenging CMU's in court for depriving
prisoners of their due process rights
and for retaliating against them for
their protected political and religious
speech many of these documents would
have never come to light without this
lawsuit the message of these groups and
my message for you today is that we must
bear witness to what is being done to
these prisoners their treatment is a
reflection of the values held beyond
prison walls this story is not just
about prisoners it is about us it is
about our own commitment to human rights
it is about whether we will choose to
stop repeating the mistakes of our past
if we don't listen to what father
beragon described as the stories of the
dead they will soon become the stories
of ourselves thank you
[Music]
I have just a couple questions when I
was in high school I learned about the
Bill of Rights the Constitution freedom
of speech due process and about 25 other
laws and rights that seemed to be
violated by this how could this possibly
be happening I think that's the number
one question I get throughout all of my
work and the short answer is that people
don't know I think the solution to any
of these types of situations any rights
abuses are really dependent on two
things they're dependent on knowledge
that it's actually happening and then a
means in an efficacy to actually make a
change and unfortunately with these
prisoners one people don't know what's
happening at all and then they're
already disenfranchised populations who
don't have access to attorneys not
native English speakers in some of these
cases they have great representation
that I mentioned but there's just not a
public awareness of what's happening
isn't it guaranteed in prison that you
have right to counsel or access to
counsel there's a tendency in our
culture to see when people have
convicted of a crime no matter if that
charge was bogus or legitimate that
whatever happens to them after that is
warranted and I think that's a really
damaging and dangerous narrative that we
have that allows these types of things
to happen as the general public just
kind of turns a blind eye to it all of
those documents on screen were all real
documents word-for-word unread you know
unchanged at all right absolutely I've
actually uploaded all of them to my
website it's willpotter comm slash CMU
and it's a footnoted version of the talk
so you can see the documents for
yourself without the little snippets you
can see the full version I relied
overwhelmingly on primary source
documents or on primary interviews with
former and current prisoners with people
that are dealing with this situation
every day and like I said have been
there myself as well you're doing
creatives work thank you very much thank
you all
[Music]